Kim Barkhahn
Paleobiology
Dinosaurs in decline tens of millions of years before their final extinction
Manabu Sakamoto, Michael J. Benton, and ChrisVenditti (2016)

Article Summary
	Although Mesozoic dinosaurs dominated land until the end Cretaceous, they did experience a long term decline in speciation rates as well as increased extinction rates tens of millions of years before the Chicxulub impact. This made dinosaurs more susceptible to sudden and catastrophic environmental changes, like an asteroid impact. These results were found by use of a Bayesian phylogenetic approach to model the evolutionary dynamics of speciation and extinction through the Mesozoic. 
      There were only two exceptions to their results: hadrosauriforms and ceratopsids. These species had high speciation rates and low morphological rates, due to an increase in provincialism (speciation due to geographic isolation). Sea level was rising throughout the Cretaceous, which increases continental fragmentation and in turn, reproductive isolation and speciation. The study found that even when rising sea level was included, the decline of speciation was not affected for the majority of dinosaurs.  

Things you liked about the paper
	I liked that the graphs showed hadrosauriforms and ceratopsids, even though they are exceptions to the overall trend of decreasing speciation. Including what doesn’t agree with the general results and providing a possible explanation why offers strong support to the overall research. The addition of rising sea level being a possible driver of speciation decline also helps to support the results. The Western Interior Seaway is well known in the Cretaceous, and rising sea levels with the addition of continental fragmentation could have a large effect on dinosaur speciation. It was addressed that undersampling could have contributed to the results, but other models were fitted to include such biases and still provided the same results. (How well this part was done remains uncertain.)

Things you did not like about the paper
	I did not find the reasoning for ecological limit on speciation to be persuasive. As talked about in class, just because there is a niche that can be filled, does not mean that the niche will be filled. The niche theory for increased speciation did not fit their model, so I was unsure why this small paragraph was included at all. 
	At the beginning of the paper its said that “extinction rate exceeds speciation rate from ~24 My before the K-Pg boundary”, while at the end it is stated that “extinction rate surpassed speciation rate at least 40 My before their final extinction”. Unless there is a subtle difference in these phrasings that I am missing, it seems that the actual date of this event is unclear, and therefore should not be stated at all (or at least give a range). 

Evaluate the graphs and figures (if any)
	 Figure two shows the modeled predictions of speciation through time in Mesozoic dinosaurs. The graphs show the two predicted outcomes: that speciation was constant up until the end Cretaceous, and that speciation slowed down millions of years before then end Cretaceous. The graphs represent their findings very clearly; it is easy to see that the quadratic model fits their findings better than the linear model. I liked that the two species that are exceptions to their overall results were added in the graph.  
      Diagram A of figure three shows the various branches of a dinosaurian phylogeny and how they multiplied over time. It also shows when extinction rates began to exceed speciation rates for each species branch. It is easy to see where most species begin the decline in speciation and where hadrosauriforms and ceratopsids increase in speciation. Diagram B shows the net speciation per 1 My through time in Mesozoic dinosaurs. It clearly shows where in the Cretaceous speciation began to slow down, and where extinction overcame speciation rates. Again, included are the two exceptions to their results. 
