Kim Barkhahn
Paleobiology
Origination, extinction, and mass depletions of marine diversity (2004)

Article Summary
      The authors discussed what defines a mass extinction, and if the “big 5” can all truly be considered mass extinctions, or extinction events at all. Their argument was that our current view of the mass extinction events is only looking at species that go extinct, and we ignore species origination during these same events; biodiversity may be stable, or even increasing, yet we call it a mass extinction. The authors concluded that only the end Ordovician, Permian, and Cretaceous events have a severe decrease in overall diversity due to the high extinction rates and low origination rates, and therefore can be considered to be mass extinctions. In contrast, both the late Devonian and end Triassic have low extinction rates coupled with low origination rates, slowing the rate of biodiversity. The authors also treated the Cambrian and Early Ordovician biodiversity levels separately, due to the differences in their radiation events. Overall, they found that statistically there are two modes of extinction (excluding the Cambrian and Early Ordovician), leading to the conclusion that the changes of origination and extinction are statistically different during the three mass extinctions stated above, and other “background” extinctions. 

Things you liked about the paper
	I liked the concept of the paper and how they looked into originations as well as extinctions (standing biodiversity). It is a new way to look at extinctions and biodiversity throughout the Phanerozoic.  I thought the statistical analysis with the bimodal distribution represented the findings of the paper well. It was both qualitative and quantitative. I also liked that they made sure to differentiate that origination and extinction are not correlated, they are both their own separate events that do not directly affect one another. The author’s made sure to be clear in their writing, and made sure to not imply causation for any of the origination or extinction events. 

Things you did not like about the paper
	This paper had too many redundancies. There were too many graphs with biased measurement systems. The paper could have been much more concise and still be able to clearly state the findings of their work. I think there needed to be a more defined layout of what is considered a mass extinction and just background extinctions. And it needed to be stated in the intro, not in the discussion part of the paper. It seemed like they formed definitions to fit the data that they found, rather than defining a term and seeing what fits or makes sense. For example, the middle of the Carboniferous is in on the line between a background extinction and a mass extinction. It is never stated why or how this was dealt with. 

Evaluate the graphs and figures (if any)
	Figure one shows the well-known diversity of genera curve throughout the Phanerozoic, and marks the big 5 mass extinctions. It includes origination of genera with dashed peaks, which is difficult to read and therefore difficult to interpret without thorough reading of the description. I don’t think the dashed peaks were needed, because the next figure helps to clarify. 
      Figure two shows the proportion of gain or loss of genus diversity in the Phanerozoic. The big 5 mass extinctions are clearly below the range that depicts background extinctions. It helps show how different this count of origination with extinction compares with just extinction rates. But, because proportion of change was measured, every data point after a mass extinction is a steep increase due to the increase in number of a small proportion of genera during the extinction. Any increase will appear to be quite large. 
      Figure three shows the proportion of genus extinction in ranked intensity order. The first graph highlights the Cambrian and Early Ordovician, and the second graph excludes both. It is a good way to see how these events affected the results in they were left in the statistical model. Without the Cambrian and Early Ordovician, it is easy to see the high rates of extinction in the End Permian, Ordovician, and Cretaceous. 
      Figure four was not needed. 
      Figure five shows the bimodal distribution from their statistical analysis of extinction magnitudes. This helped to clarify their work to someone who is not well-versed in statistics. 
      Figure six was busy, and seems to be quite similar to figure two, but shows origination and extinction separately. It clears up some of the problems from figure two, but it was very busy, and may have been put with figure two, rather than three pages after. 
      Figure seven shows the relationships between origination and extinction for the three mass extinction events that the authors believe to be true mass extinction events. It is really just zooming in on parts of figure six, and I’m really not sure it was necessary. 
      Figure eight basically shows that origination and extinction do not coincide with one another. They are their own events. I thought the concept was clear, and I’m not sure this figure was needed. 
      Figure nine showed similar concepts as figure seven, but with the Cambrian and Ordovician. The overall concept is that the extinction events are not really extinction events, just that there was little to no origination driving biodiversity. The first graph wasn’t necessary – it’s hard to read and hard to visually estimate values of turnover. Graph B was clear and concise, yet seemed redundant with the plethora of other graphs included in this paper. 
