Kim Barkhahn
Paleobiology
The Red Queen and the Court Jester: Species Diversity and the Role of Biotic and Abiotic Factors Through Time By: Michael J. Benton (2009)

Article Summary
	The Red Queen model views evolution as principally a balance of biotic pressures, specifically competition in an ecosystem. In contrast, the Court Jester model is the view that evolution, speciation, and extinction rarely happen except in response to unpredictable changes in the physical environment. It seems that competition, predation, and other biotic factors shape ecosystems locally over short periods of time (Red Queen), but large factors like climate, oceanographic, and tectonic events shape larger scale patterns in regions and around the globe, through thousands to millions of years. Both of these models appear to be density dependent, so there are limits to rises in diversity and conversely rapid recovery after extinction events is stimulated. 
      The author argues that the best way to study evolutionary history is with a complete species tree, which is easier said than done. Many researchers make generalizations and risk errored calculations due to its complexity. In addition, genera or family is usually studied because they are more complete, but it is unknown how these patterns relate to the species level. 
      One source of proof of the resource-use hypothesis is when sister taxa is compared. Two antelope subgroups were compared, and it was found that the “generalists” are less speciose and have longer species durations than “specialists”. (Sisters are taxon that arose from a single ancestor, so any similarities in their subsequent evolution reflect the common origin, and differences reflect independent histories.)

Things you liked about the paper
	Not Much.
	I thought the figures help to explain and show the differences between the Red Queen and the Court Jester hypothesis. The author went in depth about different theories of species diversification and sister taxa, which show how the hypotheses are exampled in real life settings. Specifically, the example with two antelope subgroups was clearly explained and was a good instance of the resource-use hypothesis. 

Things you did not like about the paper
	I did not like the comment made about abundance and life history characteristics sometimes correlating with high species richness. If they only sometimes correlate, do they correlate at all?
      Overall, the paper seemed to be spread all over. It starts with the Red Queen and Court Jester hypothesis and then moves on to species diversification, different phylogenetic studies, and sister taxa. Although all are related and important for the study, the material just was not presented well. It seemed to have lacked an actual hypothesis. Rather than having something tested, a lot of information and definitions were thrown out there. I think an actual hypothesis needs to be tested and proved/disproved and explained why they thought this was the outcome.

Evaluate the graphs and figures (if any)
	 Figure one shows different views of the Red Queen and Court Jester hypothesis. Both graphs show that the Red Queen hypothesis prevails in localities and at short time scales, while the Court Jester hypothesis prevails over large regions/continents at large time scales. Both A and B graphs are highly similar, but graph B includes the microevolutionary Red Queen rather than macroevolutionary, which has been widely rejected. 
	Figure two shows patterns of marine animal genus diversification through the past 530 Ma, aka the Phanerozoic. The red line is the current estimates from the Sepkoski database, while the blue line corrects for sampling error with the Paleobiology Database. The blue line suggests that global marine diversity reached a near-modern levels some 400 Ma and there has only been modest increase since then. Since the focus of this paper was the Red Queen and Court Jester hypothesis, I am not sure that this part of the paper was needed. It seems to need its own full explanation.
	Figure three shows the phylogenetic relationships and morphospace occupation for Triassic archosaurs. A gives an example of a phylogenetic tree throughout time, showing the evolution of Crurotarsi and Dinosauria. This was a good model to explain the concept of sister taxa and how it can be helpful. B give the morphospace occupation for archosaurs. This seems to be helpful and insightful, but I can’t help but wonder how much sampling error is affecting these results. I think this is a decent graph, but it lacks to draw any definite conclusions. 
