Kim Barkhahn
Paleobiology
Determinates of Extinction in the Fossil Record By: Shanan E. Peters and Michael Foote

Article Summary
	The authors’ goal was to determine the biases in the rock record pertaining to the extinction rate of marine genera. They used the amount of exposed marine sedimentary rock to predict how the fossil record would appear if the time series of true extinction rates was smooth. To test their findings, a null distribution of correlation coefficients was generated by randomizing the formation time series and recalculating the correlation between their model and actual observations in the field. The results were in close match with what is seen in reality, and therefore can be interpreted as statistical descriptions of the potential effects of varied preservation rates for apparent extinction rates, meaning that this is not giving the definite rate of extinction. The two explanations given for the corresponding data between the model and data are that 1 – some extinction events may involve a great loss of genera than expected and 2 – that a common cause affects both extinction and the amount of rock preserved and exposed at Earth’s surface. 

Things you liked about the paper
      I thought that figure three helped to sum up the results of the null distribution very well. The correlation between observed and modeled data. Having randomized the formation time series helped to take out any other possible variables that could have influenced the data. 
      I liked that the results supported two hypotheses about the fossil record – the a common geologic cause determines both true extinction rates and the amount of exposed rock, and that much of the observed short-term volatility in extinction rates is an artefact of variability in the stratigraphic record. To me, the fact that their results support two hypotheses that seem to have a very logical sense of thinking to them helps back up the results of the study. (Although, I know that this is not a scientific way of backing up results.)

Things you did not like about the paper
      I would have liked to see where more of their data is coming from. It is mentioned in the last part of the paper, but I would have liked to see a table including the number of formations, area they take up, and maybe where there are time gaps in the fossil record. Additionally, I felt that the discussion of the results of the study was bit short. A lot of time went into discussing the statistical reasoning of the study, but not as much on what it means for paleontology as a whole. This study could change the way people look at the fossil record, and I don’t think that impression was fully given in the paper. 

Evaluate the graphs and figures (if any)
	Figure one included a graph of the number of marine geologic formations per geologic time in millions of years, and two graphs of the observed extinction rate per lineage in millions of years, versus the number of marine geologic formations, with and without one-stage lag. The first graph, although useful, was just too small for me to see its real potential. The details were lost when the graph was scaled down. The last two graphs clearly show the correlation with and without lag of the data.  
      Figure two was similar to figure one, but rather shows the observed extinction rates and the modeled extinction rates. There seems to be a clearer similarity in graphs a and b here compared to Figure 1 first graph. Even though details are lost, it is clear that observed and modeled extinction rates follow a similar pattern. These graphs help immensely to show the results of the study and to help visualized what the authors’ are explaining throughout the paper. 
      Figure three is a graph of the null distributions of correlation coefficients when randomizing the formation time series and finding the correlation between the model and observations. Again, the correlation between data sets is easily seen and helps supports the authors’ argument. 
